---
title: 糖刹车
subtitle:
date: 2024-11-15T14:27:28+08:00
draft: false
type: posts
author:
  name:
  link:
  email:
  avatar:
description:
keywords:
license:
comment: false
weight: 0
tags:
  - 文献阅读
categories:
  - 文献阅读
hiddenFromHomePage: false
hiddenFromSearch: false
summary:
resources:
  - name: featured-image
    src: featured-image.jpg
  - name: featured-image-preview
    src: featured-image-preview.jpg
toc: true
math: false
lightgallery: false
password:
message:
repost:
  enable: true
  url:

# See details front matter: https://fixit.lruihao.cn/documentation/content-management/introduction/#front-matter
---

题目：[Releasing a sugar brake generates sweeter tomato without yield penalty](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-08186-2)  
文章单位：
通讯作者：[黄三文]()  
- [Abstract](#Abstract)
- [Introduction](#Introduction)
- [Result](#Result)
- [Method](#Method)
- [Discussion](#Discussion)
- [Fig](#Fig)
- 专业英语
1. phosphorylating v．磷酸化：生物化学过程中，将磷酸基团转移到一个分子（通常是蛋白质）上的过程。
2. sucrose n.蔗糖
3. glucose and fructose  n. 葡萄糖和果糖
## Abstract {#Abstract}
&emsp; In tomato, sugar content is highly correlated with consumer preferences, with most  consumers preferring sweeter fruit<sup>1–4</sup>. However, the sugar content of commercial  varieties is generally low, as it is inversely correlated with fruit size, and growers  prioritize yield over flavour quality<sup>5–7</sup>. Here we identified two genes, tomato (Solanum  lycopersicum) <font color="darkred" ><b>calcium-dependent protein kinase 27 (SlCDPK27; also known as SlCPK27)  and its paralogue SlCDPK26</b></font>, that control fruit sugar content. They act as sugar brakes  by phosphorylating a sucrose synthase, which promotes degradation of the sucrose  synthase. Gene-edited SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26 knockouts <font color="darkred"><b>increased glucose and  fructose contents by up to 30%</b></font>, enhancing perceived sweetness without fruit weight  or yield penalty. Although there are fewer, lighter seeds in the mutants, they exhibit  normal germination. Together, these findings provide insight into the regulatory  mechanisms controlling fruit sugar accumulation in tomato and offer opportunities  to increase sugar content in large-fruited cultivars without sacrificing size and yield.
## Introduction {#Introduction}
&emsp; Tomato is the most valuable vegetable crop, worldwide, and makes  substantial overall health and nutritional contributions to the human  diet. One key component of tomato fruit quality is the soluble solids  content (SSC). Sugars, mainly fructose and glucose, constitute approxi-  mately 55% to 65% of the total SSC fraction and 50% of the total solids  in the tomato fruit8. Sugar content and sugar/acid ratio are the major  constituents affecting taste and account for approximately half of  overall consumer liking1. Most consumers prefer a sweeter tomato2–4.  Higher sugar content also positively contributes to the economic value  for processing tomatoes; an increase of SSC from 4% to 5% could reduce  raw material consumption by up to 25% when producing tomato sauce  at a sugar concentration of 28% (ref. 9).  

&emsp;  Crop domestication is a dynamic and continuous process that  strongly reflects human preference. An obvious feature of tomato  domestication is the massive increase in fruit size, with cultivated toma-  toes being 10–100 times larger than their wild ancestor10. However,  these increased yields have resulted in a lower sugar content5,6. The  strong negative correlation between fruit weight and sugar content is  probably associated with the loss of high-sugar alleles during domesti-  cation and improvement, as photoassimilates must be partitioned into  the larger fruits7,11,12. As yield and fruit size are the major determinants  of variety selection by the industry, breaking this negative correla-  tion between sugar content and yield would be a major breakthrough,  especially for consumers.  

&emsp;  Genetic, molecular and biochemical characterization of wild tomato  species, with high fruit SSC, has greatly improved our understand-  ing of carbohydrate metabolism in tomato, and could potentially be  exploited in breeding programmes13–16. For example, an acid invertase  gene (TIVI) from Solanum chmielewskii can confer enhanced fruit sugar  composition17,18. Similarly, a single amino acid change in the product of  the Solanum pennellii allele for lycopersicum invertase 5 (LIN5) results  in a kinetically superior enzyme, thereby increasing the net transport  of photoassimilate into the fruit13. Introgression of the FGRH allele  from a wild Solanum habrochaites accession (LA1777) into cultivated  tomato significantly increased the fructose-to-glucose ratio of ripe  fruits19,20. Transgenic alterations, by repression or overexpression of  various genes, have provided valuable information on the roles of vari-  ous enzymes in sugar metabolism4,21–23. However, an understanding  of the genetic and molecular basis of natural variation of tomato fruit  sugars remains limited.  

&emsp;  The genome-wide association study (GWAS) approach is a powerful  technology to dissect complex agronomic traits and identify loci suit-  able for genetic improvement24. The development of metabolomics  tools, such as gas chromatography with mass spectrometry (MS) and  liquid chromatography with MS/MS, has facilitated comprehensive  phenotyping of complex metabolomic traits11. Recently, metabolome  GWAS has detected many significantly associated loci for tomato sugar  accumulation7,11,25–28. However, reducing a quantitative trait locus to a causative gene can be difficult, and only a few candidate genes have  been functionally validated.  

&emsp;  Our recent work analysing 33 chemicals specifically associated with  consumer preference and flavour intensity yielded a total of 251 associ-  ated loci for 20 traits7. Two loci were significantly associated with both  glucose and fructose contents, corresponding to two major quantita-  tive trait loci, LIN5 and SSC11.1 (ref. 7). Here we identified a 12-base-pair  (bp) insertion in the promoter of SlCDPK27 that is associated with the  high-sugar allele of the SSC11.1 locus. Moreover, genome editing of  SlCDPK27 and its paralogue SlCDPK26 increased glucose and fructose  contents by up to 30% without fruit weight or yield penalty, offering  an opportunity to engineer sweeter tomatoes in large-fruited cultivars  without sacrificing size or yield.
## Result {#Result}
### Identification of SlCDPK27
&emsp; To identify new alleles of genes contributing to sugar accumulation,  we performed a GWAS analysis and identified a major peak on chromosome 11, in which the top single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP;  ch11_51186147; SL2.50) was strongly associated with SSC (P = 8.96 × 10−10;  Fig. 1a), consistent with our previous results<sup>7</sup>. <font color="darkred"><b>Linkage disequilibrium  analysis</b></font> of the peak region showed that the top SNP is located within an  approximately 80-kilobase (kb) block (Fig. 1b) spanning 6 genes. Using  a relatively strict P value threshold (P < 1 × 10−6), we identified six SNPs  in this block that are significantly associated with SSC (Supplementary  Table 1), but found that none of these SNPs caused a nonsynonymous  mutation. We then examined the expression of the six candidate genes among all accessions. Only Solyc11g065660, annotated as encoding  SlCDPK27 (ref. 29), exhibited an obvious negatively correlated expression pattern with SSC accumulation (Fig. 1c), indicating that it might  act to negatively regulate sugar accumulation.

&emsp; To fully resolve the DNA sequence variation in SlCDPK27, variants in  the genomic sequences of SlCDPK27, including the 2.3-kb promoter  region, were identified within 20 accessions. Among these variants,  we identified a 12-bp insertion within the promoter region containing several conserved DNA motifs with the core sequence of CAACA  (Supplementary Table 2), which could be potentially recognized by  RAV transcriptional repressors<sup>30,31</sup>. In addition, we also detected one  SNP and one 3-bp deletion in the coding sequence that cause nonsynonymous mutations (Supplementary Table 2). By genotyping these three variants from all accessions, we established that they all showed a significant association with SSC (Extended Data Fig. 1a–c and Supplementary Table 3).

&emsp; On the basis of these 3 significant variants in SlCDPK27, 344 accessions were classified into 3 haplotype groups (Hap1–Hap3; Fig. 1d).  Statistically, the accessions with Hap2 or Hap3, both containing the 12-bp insertion, showed significantly higher SSC than those with Hap1  (Fig. 1d). There was no significant difference in SSC between accessions with Hap2 and those with Hap3, which differ only in the coding  sequence, indicating that the 12-bp insertion in the promoter region  could be the causal variant. The frequencies of the 12-bp insertion in  PIM (local wild relative Solanum pimpinellifolium accessions whose  fruits weigh about 2 g), CER (Solanum lycopersicum var. cerasiforme  accessions whose fruits weigh about 13 g) and BIG (S. lycopersicum  accessions whose fruits average about 111 g)<sip>10</sup> indicate that the allele  associated with high SSC is prevalent in wild populations, but has largely  been lost in modern cultivars (Fig. 1e and Supplementary Table 4).

### SlCDPK27 negatively regulates sugar content
&emsp; To validate the function of SlCDPK27 in regulating sugar accumu-  lation, we knocked out SlCDPK27 in S. lycopersicum Money Maker  (MM) and the processing variety M82, using CRISPR–Cas9. Three null  mutants for SlCDPK27, named MM-CDPK27-CR1, MM-CDPK27-CR2  and M82-CDPK27-CR3 were obtained (Fig. 2a). MM-CDPK27-CR1 with a 6-bp deletion (from 183 to 188 bp downstream of the start codon) in  the ATP-binding domain (Extended Data Fig. 2) is expected to disrupt  its kinase activity32. MM-CDPK27-CR2 and M82-CDPK27-CR3, with  5-bp deletions (from 184 to 188 bp downstream of ATG), result in the  premature termination of protein translation (Extended Data Fig. 2).  To determine whether SlCDPK27 possesses the kinase activity, and  whether the L62 and G63 residues absent in the MM-CDPK27-CR1  mutant would disrupt its kinase activity, we purified His-tagged  SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK27-CR1 proteins. In vitro kinase assays, using  32P-labelled adenosine triphosphate (ATP), showed that SlCDPK27 is a  bona fide kinase (Fig. 2b). Consistent with L62 and G63 being essential  for kinase activity, the recombinant SlCDPK27-CR1 mutant protein underwent little to no autophosphorylation (Fig. 2b).  

&emsp; We then selected homozygous MM-CDPK27-CR1, MM-CDPK27-CR2  and M82-CDPK27-CR3 mutant lines without Cas9 for further study.  Compared with the wild-type lines, the total SSC and glucose and fruc-  tose contents were increased in all three mutants (Fig. 2d–f,h–j). Nota-  bly, in the MM-CDPK27-CR1 mutant plants, the total SSC and glucose  and fructose contents were increased by 16%, 35% and 30%, respectively.  Unexpectedly, no significant differences in fruit weight were detected  between wild-type and mutant plants (Fig. 2c,g). These results indicate  that SlCDPK27 acts as a negative regulator of sugar accumulation in  tomato fruits, and dysfunction of SlCDPK27 could significantly increase  tomato sugar content without affecting single fruit weight.

### Expression pattern of SlCDPK27

&emsp; To investigate the temporal expression pattern of SlCDPK27, we measured its relative expression, in pericarp tissue, at different stages of  fruit development. Analysis using quantitative PCR with reverse transcription (qRT–PCR) revealed that the number of SlCDPK27 transcripts  increases gradually during fruit ripening, at which stage the fruit size  is already fixed (Fig. 3a). This expression pattern is consistent with  the role of SlCDPK27 as a ‘sink gene’, regulating the ability of the fruit  to store photosynthetic sugars, without affecting the fruit weight.

&emsp; To further clarify the SlCDPK27 expression pattern during fruit development, we generated transgenic plants expressing the β-glucuronidase  (GUS) reporter gene driven by a 2,452-bp promoter of SlCDPK27. The  promoter activity of SlCDPK27 was measured at different fruit developmental stages, including the immature green, mature green, orange and  ripe stages. GUS staining showed that SlCDPK27 is expressed at a low  level around the vascular tissues of the fruit pericarp at the immature  green stages, and its level of expression increases substantially during  ripening (Fig. 3b), consistent with the results of qRT–PCR analysis. We  observed that SlCDPK27 is also expressed in seeds (Fig. 3b), indicating  that SlCDPK27 may also have a role in seed development.  
> β-glucuronidase β-葡萄糖醛酸酶  vascular 导管 substantially 大量地；可观地

&emsp; To determine the subcellular localization of SlCDPK27, we generated 35S-SlCDPK27–GFP and 35S-SlCDPK27-CR1–GFP constructs, in  which SlCDPK27-CR1 contains the mutated SlCDPK27 present in the  MM-CDPK27-CR1 mutant. When we transiently expressed these two  reporters in tobacco leaves, the green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion  protein analysis demonstrated that both SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK27-CR1  were localized at the cell periphery (Fig. 3c), and the two-amino-acid  deletion in the MM-CDPK27-CR1 mutant did not affect its subcellular  localization.  
> transiently 瞬时  

### SlCDPK26 functions redundantly to SlCDPK27
&emsp; We observed that MM-CDPK27-CR1 showed a greater increase in sugar  accumulation than MM-CDPK27-CR2, which is thought to be a typical  null mutant for SlCDPK27. Therefore, we reasoned that the higher sugar  content in MM-CDPK27-CR1 was caused by the kinase-dead protein  functioning in a dominant-negative manner, in which the altered pro-  tein product is able to interfere with other kinases. SlCDPK27 belongs  to a large calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK) family, and there are 29 CDPK proteins in tomato, which could be divided into four  groups29. SlCDPK27 belongs to group III, with SlCDPK26 (also known  as Solyc01g008440) showing the closest evolutionary relationship to  SlCDPK27 (Fig. 4a), which led us to test whether SlCDPK26 may func-  tion similarly to SlCDPK27.  

&emsp; We first examined the relative expression level of SlCDPK26 during  fruit development and determined that it is also expressed at increasing levels during fruit ripening, in fruit pericarp tissue (Fig. 4b), tempo-  rally overlapping SlCDPK27. Then we mutated SlCDPK26 (Extended  Data Fig. 3a,b), and found that plants with loss of SlCDPK26 function  exhibited comparable fruit weight and sugar content to those of the  wild-type plants (Extended Data Fig. 3c–f). We also generated an  MM-CDPK27-CR2/MM-CDPK26-CR1 double mutant and planted the  double mutant as well as the MM-CDPK27-CR1 and MM-CDPK27-CR2 single mutants (Cas9-free) in two locations (Beijing and Shouguang),  and evaluated the sugar content and fruit weight of these mutants in  the spring of 2020 and autumn of 2021 (Shouguang), spring of 2022  (Beijing) and spring of 2023 (Beijing). Compared with the wild-type  line, all mutant fruits exhibited no obvious differences during fruit  development (Fig. 4c), including the final fruit weight (Fig. 4d and  Extended Data Fig. 4a,b). Notably, the total SSC and glucose and  fructose contents were increased in the mutants, especially in the  MM-CDPK27-CR2/MM-CDPK26-CR1 double mutant (Fig. 4e and  Extended Data Fig. 4c–g), indicating that simultaneous mutagenesis  of SlCDPK26 enhances the effects of SlCDPK27 on sugar content. We  also measured the total fruit yield and fruit number for each plant,  collected from six subsequent individual inflorescences. All of the  SlCDPK-knockout mutants exhibited comparable fruit yield and fruit  number to those of the wild-type line (Fig. 4f,g and Extended Data  Fig. 4h,i).  

&emsp; To investigate whether the increased sugar content in these  SlCDPK-knockout mutants would improve perceived fruit sweetness,  we organized two large-scale sensory evaluation panels, one in March  2022, in Shenzhen, and the other in July 2022, in Beijing. Fruits from  the mutants and wild-type lines, which were planted in each of three  plots, were tasted by approximately 100 volunteers, who were asked  to choose which sample was sweeter. In these sensory panels, fruits  from MM-CDPK27-CR1 and the MM-CDPK27-CR2/MM-CDPK26-CR1 double mutant were identified as being significantly sweeter than the  wild-type line (Table 1), an outcome consistent with the measured fruit  sugar content in each mutant (Fig. 4h,i).

### SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26 phosphorylate SlSUS3
&emsp; Sucrose synthase (SUS) is a key enzyme that directly hydrolyses sucrose  to supply substrates for plant metabolism, and is considered to be a  biomarker for plant sink strength33. So far, six tomato SlSUS genes have  been described. These genes are expressed differentially in different  tomato tissues, with the highest level of expression of SlSUS3 observed  in mature fruits34. To elucidate the molecular mechanism modulated by SlCDPK27 in regulating sugar accumulation, we performed immuno-  precipitation coupled with MS, using an SlCDPK27 antibody, to screen  for potential phosphorylated substrates of SlCDPK27, and identified  SlSUS3 as a putative SlCDPK27-interacting protein (Supplementary  Table 5).  

&emsp; To further confirm the interaction between SlCDPK27 and SlSUS3,  we cloned the SlSUS3 full-length coding region, and verified their inter-  action by yeast two-hybrid assay (Fig. 5a). We also investigated the  interaction between SlSUS3 and SlCDPK27 through firefly luciferase  (LUC) complementation imaging assays. Fluorescence was observed  in the leaf areas co-transformed with the carboxy terminus of LUC  fused to SlSUS3 and the amino terminus of LUC fused to SlCDPK27,  whereas no detectable fluorescent signal was present in leaf tissue  co-transformed with the control plasmids (Fig. 5b). Furthermore, we  confirmed the in vivo interaction between SlCDPK26 and SlSUS3 by  the LUC complementation imaging assay (Fig. 5c).  

&emsp; As both SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26 possessed kinase activities  and could interact with SlSUS3, we reasoned that SlCDPK27 and  SlCDPK26 might directly phosphorylate SlSUS3. In vitro protein  kinase assays, using recombinant proteins, supported this hypoth-  esis. His–SlCDPK27 and His–SlCDPK26 directly phosphorylated His–  TF–SlSUS3, whereas the mutant protein His–SlCDPK27-CR1 did not  (Fig. 5d,e). An examination of the phosphorylation sites in SlSUS3,  using liquid chromatography with MS/MS, revealed that S11 was prob-  ably phosphorylated by SlCDPK27. We next substituted this serine to  alanine (SlSUS3(S11A)), and the resulting SlSUS3(S11A) was no longer  phosphorylated by SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26 (Fig. 5d,e), further sup-  porting that SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26 mainly phosphorylate SlSUS3  at the S11 residue.  

&emsp; Previous work has indicated that CDPK-mediated phosphoryla-  tion of SUS proteins can target SUS for degradation35. To investigate  the effects of SlSUS3 phosphorylation by SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26,  we performed a cell-free degradation assay. The degradation rate of  SlSUS3 was much higher in the wild-type than in MM-CDPK27-CR1 and  MM-CDPK27-CR2/MM-CDPK26-CR1 double-mutant extracts (Fig. 5f  and Extended Data Fig. 5a), and slightly higher in the wild-type than in the MM-CDPK27-CR2 or MM-CDPK26-CR1 single-mutant extracts  (Extended Data Fig. 5b,c), consistent with the sugar content in each  mutant. Moreover, SlSUS3(S11A) showed a much higher stability  than SlSUS3 (Fig. 5g). These results further support the hypothesis  that SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26 serve as brakes on fruit sugar metab-  olism, operating by phosphorylating SlSUS3 at S11, which in turn is  degraded.  
  
&emsp; As SlCDPK27 functions through phosphorylating SlSUS3 to be  degraded, we reasoned that overexpression of SlSUS3 may also improve  the sugar content. We constructed two SlSUS3-overexpressing lines  in MM, which are driven by the fruit-specific E8 promoter36. Over-  expression of SlSUS3 indeed increased the sugar content with little  effect on fruit weight (Fig. 5h–l), compared with these features in wild-type plants, similar to the cases of MM-CDPK27-CR1 and the  MM-CDPK27-CR2/MM-CDPK26-CR1 double mutant.

### SlCDPK27-CR1 inhibits SlSUS3 phosphorylation
&emsp; The MM-CDPK27-CR1 mutant harbours a kinase-dead version of  SlCDPK27 and accumulates more sugar than MM-CDPK27-CR2, which  contains only 72 amino acids of the N terminus of SlCDPK27 (named  SlCDPK27-CR2). To examine whether SlCDPK27-CR1 could interfere with  the function of SlCDPK26, we first analysed the interaction between  SlSUS3 and SlCDPK27-CR1, or SlCDPK27-CR2, using LUC complemen-  tation imaging assays. The results demonstrated that SlCDPK27-CR1 could interact with SlSUS3 in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves, whereas  SlCDPK27-CR2 could not (Fig. 6a). Next we co-expressed SlCDPK26–  nLUC and cLUC–SlSUS3 with 35S-SlCDPK27-CR1 or 35S-SlCDPK27-CR2 in two halves of the same N. benthamiana leaves, and determined that the  fluorescent signals in the halves co-transformed with 35S-SlCDPK27-CR1  were demonstrably weaker than those with 35S-SlCDPK27-CR2 (Fig. 6b),  consistent with our hypothesis that SlCDPK27-CR1 can disrupt the  interaction between SlSUS3 and SlCDPK26.  

&emsp; As SlCDPK27-CR1 by itself could not phosphorylate SlSUS3, and  SlSUS3 was phosphorylated by SlCDPK26 at a high level (Fig. 5d,e),  we next performed an in vitro phosphorylation assay to assess  whether SlCDPK27-CR1 could affect the phosphorylation capacity of  SlCDPK26 against SlSUS3. These assays established that as the amount  of SlCDPK27-CR1 was increased, both the phosphorylation level of  SlSUS3 by SlCDPK26 and the self-phosphorylation level of SlCDPK26  became weaker, whereas the negative control GST protein had barely  no effect (Fig. 6c), indicating that SlCDPK27-CR1 can not only compete  with the interaction between SlCDPK26 and SlSUS3, but also affect the SlCDPK26 kinase activity, to protect SlSUS3 from being phosphorylated by SlCDPK26.

### SlCDPK-knockout mutants contain fewer, lighter seeds  
&emsp; As noted earlier, SlCDPK27 is expressed in seeds, especially at the early stage of seed development (Fig. 3b). On the basis of this find-ing, we measured the seed number per fruit, and the 1,000-seed weight for each of the mutants. We determined that the seed num-ber of the MM-CDPK27-CR1 mutant fruit was significantly decreased by 18% (Extended Data Fig. 6a), and the 1,000-seed weight of the MM-CDPK27-CR2/MM-CDPK26-CR1 double mutant was 13% lower than that of the wild type (Extended Data Fig. 6b), indicating that defi-ciency in SlCDPKs had a small negative effect on seed development. However, the MM-CDPK27-CR2/MM-CDPK26-CR1 double mutant exhibited only a slight, but statistically insignificant, decrease in the seed germination rate (Extended Data Fig. 6c). Thus, the minor reduction in seed weight is not expected to affect the suitability of the mutant in commerce.
&emsp; Compared with the wild-type plants, the SlCDPK-knockout mutants showed a comparable net photosynthetic rate and carbon partitioning rate (Extended Data Fig. 6d,e), indicating that SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26 do not influence photosynthesis in leaves. Rather, they function as sugar brakes during fruit ripening, probably to modulate the assignment of photoassimilates between fruits and seeds, ensuring adequate energy for seed development.

### Co-evolution of SSC11.1 and fruit weight loci
&emsp; During tomato domestication and improvement, sugars, which are highly correlated with consumer preferences in fresh tomatoes1 as well as economic value for processing tomatoes, have been reduced as a potential undesired linkage with increasing fruit weight7 (Extended Data Fig. 7a). There are multiple fruit weight loci located at the end of chromosome 11, including fw11.1, fw11.2 and fw11.3, among which only the gene underlying fw11.3 has been identified10,37. We analysed the causative variation of fw11.3 in 402 accessions and identified the allele associated with larger fruit, which is prevalent in the BIG popula-tion (Supplementary Tables 6 and 7). SlCDPK27 is 4.3 Mb from fw11.3, and haplotype analysis showed a notable Low-Big haplotype (91.5%) for the SSC11.1 and fw11.3 loci within the BIG population (Extended Data Fig. 7b). The local phylogeny suggested an extremely low genetic diversity in both of the loci after domestication (Extended Data Fig. 7c), which may be due to co-evolution of SSC11.1 and fw11.3. A high genetic differentiation (FST) between the wild and cultivated populations and a reduced Tajima’s D within the cultivated population were observed, supporting the presence of a large selective sweep region encompass-ing SSC11.1 and the three fw loci on chromosome 11 (50.5–56.3 Mb). An extremely low recombination rate in this region suggests limited dissociation of these candidate sites11 (Extended Data Fig. 7d,e). Fur-thermore, analysis of runs of homozygosity demonstrated a posi-tive correlation between homozygous genomic region lengths and inbreeding levels, consistent with the low recombination rate. Nota-bly, a significantly higher level of inbreeding was detected in the BIG population, with some varieties reaching genome-wide homozygo-sity (Extended Data Fig. 7f). Collectively, these results indicate a high level of genomic linkage generated by inbreeding, contributing to the frequency-dependent selection of the low-SSC phenotype, probably owing to the selection of larger fruit.  

### Conservation of SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26
&emsp; To investigate the conservation of SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26 outside tomato, we curated a dataset of 12 plant genomes encompassing angio-sperms, gymnosperms and ferns, and identified 337 protein sequences belonging to the CDPK family. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that these CDPKs could be divided into four distinct clades, with both SlCDPK26 and SlCDPK27 belonging to clade III (Extended Data Fig. 8a), consist-ent with previous reports29,38. Given the relatively close relationship between SlCDPK26 and SlCDPK27 within clade III, we focused our investigation on this specific clade. Sequence alignments indicated a high degree of conservation between SlCDPK26, SlCDPK27 and their orthologues, and the two deleted amino acids in MM-CDPK27-CR1, leucine and glycine, are conserved in almost all of the SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26 orthologues (Extended Data Fig. 8b). Moreover, sequence conservation was also observed in the gymnosperm Ginkgo biloba (Extended Data Fig. 8b), indicating potential functional similarities across diverse plant lineages.  


## Discussion {#Discussion}

&emsp; Sugars are powerful regulators of organ growth and development, and are intertwined with fruit weight in a complex and dynamic relation-ship7,39. Tomato fruit weight relies on cell division and cell enlargement, events that occur in the green developing fruit. Fruit quality, including sugar content, is largely determined during the ripening process40. However, previous studies have largely focused on manipulation of sugar metabolic enzymes that are expressed throughout fruit develop-ment, resulting in improved sugar content at the expense of reduced fruit weight40,41. One of the main goals of modern tomato breeding is to increase fruit sugar concentration while increasing or at least maintaining fruit size, which has largely proved elusive6,7. However, some recent studies advocate that this goal should be possible, such as through the genetic approach of recurrent selection42, simultane-ously manipulating certain biophysical factors and transmembrane transports43, and taking a phenotype-guided approach, using a large enough population44. Here we identified a high-sugar allele that has been selectively lost during domestication and improvement, prob-ably because of its co-evolution with fruit weight loci. SlCDPK27 and its paralogue SlCDPK26 are expressed at increasing levels during fruit ripening, at which stage they act as brakes on sugar content in fruit tis-sues through phosphorylation and subsequent degradation of SlSUS3. By genome editing of SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26, we increased SSC in the large-fruited cultivars, thereby establishing sweeter tomatoes, as assessed by consumer panels, without fruit weight or yield penalty. These findings provide insight into the genetic and molecular regula-tory mechanisms controlling fruit sugar accumulation in tomato and offer opportunities to further increase sugar content in large-fruited cultivars without sacrificing size and yield.

&emsp; Success of flowering plants depends greatly on producing vigorous seeds and effective seed dispersal45. Tomato fruit ripening is a highly coordinated developmental process that provides both a suitable envi-ronment for seed maturation and a mechanism for their dispersal<sup>46</sup>.Ripening tomato fruits, with their soft flesh and ready supply of sugars and other nutrients, attract small rodents and birds47. In plants, multiple sinks compete for the available photoassimilates, generating a priority system among them48. Tomato, in its natural environment, is a peren-nial plant. The SlCDPKs work as sugar brakes during fruit ripening, probably as a mechanism to ensure adequate sugar or energy for seed development. However, seeds within a tomato fleshy-fruited variety are primed, in situ, during the later developmental stages, and seed dry weight reaches a plateau after the fruit has reached the mature green stage49,50. In this study, we showed that a deficiency in SlCDPKs increases fruit sugar content and decreases seed number, or weight, but with normal germination, indicating that photoassimilates can be reallocated from seeds, into fruits, during ripening. However, the interaction between seeds and fruits remains poorly understood in tomato, and whether SlCDPKs directly regulate seed development, or indirectly affect seed development by regulating energy distribu-tion, will require further investigation. Future studies could evaluate the assignment of photoassimilates between fruits and seeds, which may provide an opportunity to store more energy in fruits, without affecting seed quality.

&emsp; Genetic variation is the driving force for crop improvement and natural variations in wild species have been widely used for tomato improvement41. However, naturally occurring mutations are rela-tively limited, and increasing attention has been given to developing new allelic variations for some well-studied genes51–53. In our study, SlCDPK27-CR1 mutants accumulated more sugar than SlCDPK27-CR2, owing to a dominant-negative interaction. This phenomenon is remi-niscent of the spontaneous nor and rin mutants, which also function as dominant-negative mutations instead of loss-of-function muta-tions54–56. Functional redundancy is common in the plant kingdom, serving as a resource for generation of new variants, potentially provid-ing more beneficial alleles for crop improvement, but also potentially interfering with processes as dominant-negative interactors.

&emsp; The γ-aminobutyric acid-enriched tomato, developed using CRISPR–Cas9 technology, is commercially available in Japan, opening the way for genome-edited fruits, especially for global tomato markets57,58. Sugar content is the primary determinant of fruit taste, and agricultural yield of processing tomatoes is determined by the fruit weight and the total SSC, predominantly consisting of sugars. Higher sugar content will not only positively influence consumer fruit likeability, but also reduce costs associated with processing tomatoes40. Our finding of the sugar brake genes, SlCDPK27 and SlCDPK26, and especially the creation of the SlCDPK27-CR1 allele, provides a possible solution for improving sugar content without reduction in fruit yield for modern commercial varieties, which are preferred by both consumers and producers, and CRISPR-edited ‘sweetness-promoting’ tomatoes may be available to consumers in the near future.



## Method {#Method}
## Fig {#Fig} 