---
title: 马铃薯多组学杂种优势
subtitle:
date: 2024-09-23T11:21:11+08:00
draft: false
type: posts
author:
  name:
  link:
  email:
  avatar:
description:
keywords:
license:
comment: false
weight: 0
tags:
  - 文献阅读
categories:
  - 文献阅读
hiddenFromHomePage: false
hiddenFromSearch: false
summary:
resources:
  - name: featured-image
    src: featured-image.jpg
  - name: featured-image-preview
    src: featured-image-preview.jpg
toc: true
math: false
lightgallery: false
password:
message:
repost:
  enable: true
  url:

# See details front matter: https://fixit.lruihao.cn/documentation/content-management/introduction/#front-matter
---

题目：[The multi-omics basis of potato heterosis](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jipb.13211)  
文章单位：深圳基因组所 
通讯作者：[张春芝](https://www.agis.org.cn/kydw/yjspy/dsjs/b1b3d4de0ac24849ae27c8d1f1693d14.htm)  
- [Abstract](#Abstract)
- [Introduction](#Introduction)
- [Result](#Result)
- [Method](#Method)
- [Fig](#Fig)

## Abstract {#Abstract}
## Introduction {#Introduction}
- Heterosis—the superior performance of hybrids over their parental lines—is a widespread genetic phenomenon in both plants and animals (Birchler et al., 2010; Chen, 2013; Schnable and Springer, 2013; Hochholdinger and Baldauf, 2018).
- Heterosis has been harnessed in crop breeding and is responsible for important contributions to crop production and food security.
- Three classical genetic models have been used to explain heterosis: dominance, overdominance, and epistasis (Crow, 1948; Yu et al., 1997; Baranwal et al., 2012; Chen, 2013; Schnable and Springer, 2013; Hochholdinger and Baldauf, 2018); however, these genetic models do not adequately describe the molecular basis of heterosis.
- With the development of high-throughput sequencing technology, multi-omics approaches such as genomics, transcriptomics, epitomics, proteomics, and metabolomics have become powerful tools for studying crop heterosis (He et al., 2010; Groszmann et al., 2011; Chen, 2013; Huang et al., 2015, 2016; Liu et al., 2020).
-  The combination of genome-wide DNA methylation and transcriptome analysis is commonly used to study crop heterosis.
- DNA methylation appears to play a key role in the establishment of heterosis (He et al., 2010; Shen et al., 2012; Shivaprasad et al., 2012; Shen et al., 2017; Sinha et al., 2020).
- Hybrids in Arabidopsis thaliana, oilseed rape (Brassica napus), and pigeon pea (Cajanus cajan) have higher methylation levels than their parents (Shen et al., 2012, 2017; Sinha et al., 2020).
- Moreover, the growth vigor of F1 hybrids is compromised by treatment with the DNA methylation inhibitor 5-azacytidine (Shen et al., 2012).
- At the transcriptome level, differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to plant hormones and defense have been identified as important regulators in heterosis.
- For example, the expression of various phytohormone (auxin and salicylic acid (SA))-responsive genes is significantly altered, and genes associated with basal defense are repressed in hybrid oilseed rape seedlings compared to parental lines.
- Similar findings have been reported in pigeon pea (Shen et al., 2017; Sinha et al., 2020).
- In addition, allele-specific expression genes (ASEGs) may play a role in heterosis (Springer and Stupar, 2007; Shao et al., 2019).
- In rice (Oryza sativa), 3 270 ASEGs have been identified under four conditions in response to developmental and environmental cues and might contribute to heterosis (Shao et al., 2019).
-  The metabolome more closely represents the phenotype of an organism than do the genome and transcriptome.
- Small changes in the genome can be reflected and amplified at the metabolic level (Guo et al., 2019).
- Differential accumulation of metabolites has been observed between hybrids and their parents in maize (Zea mays) and Arabidopsis (Romisch-Margl et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2014).
- A recent study shows that by additive effects coupled with epistasis through a large metabolic network, it is possible to explain most or all of the heterosis in Arabidopsis hybrids (Vacher and Small, 2019).
- Notably, Li and coworkers report that metabolic heterosis is relatively mild, and metabolites in the photosynthetic pathway show positive mid-parent heterosis (MPH), whereas metabolites in the photorespiratory pathway show negative MPH, which contributes to maize heterosis (Li et al., 2020).
-  Although heterosis has been well studied in seed crops, research on the heterosis of clonally propagated crops is lacking.
- Potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) is the most important tuber crop and is a staple food for approximately 1.3 billion people around the world (Stokstad, 2019).
- Most cultivated potatoes are autotetraploid.
- Due to the complexity of tetrasomic inheritance and the high cost of tuber propagation, reinventing potato as an inbred-line-based diploid seed crop has become a state-of-art technology in potato breeding (Lindhout et al., 2011; Jansky et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2021).
- However, self-incompatibility and inbreeding depression hamper efforts for diploid potato breeding.
- Self-incompatibility is controlled by the S-RNase alleles, which can be overcome by knock-out of S-Rnase (Ye et al., 2018; Enciso-Rodriguez et al., 2019) or utilization of the natural S-RNase mutations (Zhang et al., 2019) and the S-locus inhibitor (Sli) gene (Eggers et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2021a).
- By contrast, inbreeding depression is controlled by numerous deleterious mutations, which is much harder to overcome.
- In our previous studies, we analyzed the genetic basis of inbreeding depression and proposed the approach to purge or manage deleterious mutations (Zhang et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020).
- Based on these studies, we developed the first generation of hybrid potato with strong heterosis.
- However, the mechanism of heterosis in potato is largely unknown.
-  In this study, we integrated transcriptome, metabolome, and DNA methylation data of hybrids and their parents at the seedling, flowering, and tuber stages.
- Our results revealed candidate molecular mechanisms for potato heterosis at these three key developmental stages.
- Furthermore, we identified many ASEGs at each stage, which may play important roles in hybrid vigor..

## Result {#Result}
### Hybrid potato lines show significant morphological heterosis 
>- We conducted a reciprocal cross of two highly homozygous diploid potato lines (A6-26 (A) and E4-63 (E)) and used the progeny to decipher the molecular mechanism of heterosis by multi-omics analyses.
- Two F1 hybrids (A × E and E × A) showed strong morphological heterosis throughout the entire growth period.
- At the seedling stage, the F1 hybrids were more vigorous than their parents (Figure 1A).
- The plant heights of the hybrids were 75% (A × E) and 82% (E × A) higher than the mid-parent value (MPV), and their stem diameters were 2.23-fold (A × E) and 2.43-fold (E × A) greater than the MPV (Figure 1B).
- At the flowering stage, the F1 hybrids had larger flower organs and better pollen viability (Figure 1A, C, D).
- Unexpectedly, the flower color of the two hybrids was purple, while the flowers of their parents were white, indicating the interaction of parental genes in the hybrids.
- In addition, the tuber yield of the F1 hybrids was 1.95-fold higher than the MPV (Figure 1A, E).
- Thus, we selected these three key stages of potato development to perform transcriptome, metabolome, and DNA methylation analyses.
### F1 hybrids and their parental lines display altered transcriptome profiles 
>- To understand the changes in gene expression in the F1 hybrids compared to their parents, we performed transcriptome sequencing of the parents and hybrids using seedling leaves, flowers, and developing tubers with three biological replicates.
- Principal component analysis (PCA) showed that different stages and different materials could be clearly separated (Figure S1A).
- Then we determined that 4.27%–14.64% of the total genes were differentially expressed in the hybrids compared to the MPV (designated as MPV-hybrid DEGs) at the three stages (P < 0.05; false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01; |log2 FC (fold change)| > 1), which were defined as non-additively expressed genes and considered to be involved in the heterosis phenotype (Figures 2A, S1B; Table S1).
- Among these DEGs, 37.69%–67.45% were up-regulated in the hybrids at the three stages (Figure S1C).
- The two reciprocal F1 hybrids showed similar expression patterns.
### Distinct metabolome patterns between the F1 hybrids and their parents and MPH in metabolite levels in F1 hybrids 
- We detected metabolite levels of seedling leaves, flowers, and mature tubers in the parents and the reciprocal F1 hybrids with three biological replicates using the ultra-performance liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-ESI-MS/MS) system (Dong et al., 2020).
- We identified 898 790 and 656 non-redundant metabolites, including various types of primary and secondary metabolites, at the seedling, flowering, and tuber stages, respectively.
- Furthermore, we performed PCA on the metabolites in the parents and hybrids across the three tissues.
- Clear separations were found at each stage, indicating major differences in the metabolomes among the different genotypes and stages (Figures 2C, S2A–C).
-  To investigate the metabolites involved in potato heterosis, we analyzed the metabolites of non-additive accumulation at the three stages.
- About 80% of metabolites were shared among the hybrids and parents at the three stages (Figure S2D).
- Among the detected metabolites, 57.93%–70.76% were identified as non-additive metabolites (P < 0.05) compared with the MPV in the reciprocal hybrids (Figure S2E).
- To assure accuracy of the subsequent analysis, we used MPH to quantify the level of metabolite heterosis.
- MPH was calculated as 100 × D/A, where “A” is the average of the two parents' values, and “D” is the deviation between the hybrid values and “A”.
- We found that most primary metabolites, such as nucleotides, organic acids, and saccharides(n.糖类), showed positive MPH, while secondary metabolites, such as alkaloids(生物碱；植物碱基), phenolic acids(酚酸), and terpenoids(萜类化合物), tended to show negative MPH at the seedling and flowering stages (Figure S3A, B).
- Next, we calculated the level of total primary and secondary metabolites between MPV and hybrids.
- We found that hybrids contained more primary metabolites and less secondary metabolites, indicating more energy seems to flow to primary metabolism for growth and development in hybrids at the seedling stages (Figure 2D).
- However, the detected primary and secondary metabolites both showed negative MPH at the tuber stage (Figure S3C).
- The distinct accumulation patterns of metabolites might represent different allocations of energy.
###  Trade-off between growth vigor and disease resistance at the seedling stage 
>- To uncover the potential molecular mechanism of heterosis at the seedling stage, we performed Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses using the MPV-hybrid DEGs of leaves.
- Although “biosynthesis of secondary metabolites” was enriched in both hybrids (Figure 3A, B), about 60% of the DEGs in this term were down-regulated, which was consistent with the negative MPH of secondary metabolites in the metabolome analysis.
- In addition, the MPV-hybrid DEGs were significantly enriched in the terms “plant-pathogen interaction” and “plant hormone signal transduction” (FDR < 0.05) (Figure 3A, B).
- These terms might be related to seedling heterosis.
- Hormones are important regulators of plant growth and development.
- KEGG enrichment analysis showed that auxin (indole acetic acid (IAA)) was the main hormone involved in the term “plant hormone signal transduction.” Although genes that participate in auxin biosynthesis were not found among the MPV-hybrid DEGs, auxin transporter protein (AUX1) and auxin responsive genes (IAA17, GH3, and SAUR) were remarkably enriched and up-regulated in the two F1 hybrids, reflecting that a quick response to auxin in the hybrids might promote plant growth (Figure 3C).
- In addition, ethylene-responsive transcription factor 1 (ERF1) was also up-regulated in hybrids (Figure 3C).
- Overexpression of ERF1 induced salt, drought and heat stress tolerance in plants.
-  “Plant-pathogen interaction” was one of the most markedly enriched terms in our KEGG analysis in the two F1 hybrids.
- Notably, defense response genes were down-regulated in the F1 hybrids, including many well-known pathogen-responsive genes: pathogenesis-related protein 1 (PR1), FLAGELLIN-SENSING2 (FLS2), disease resistance protein (RPS2), and the transcription factor WRKY33.
- SA is an important hormone associated with plant defense responses.
- The SA biosynthetic gene PAL1 was also down-regulated in both hybrids compared to the MPV (Figure 3C).
- Given that plant immunity and plant growth are antagonistic processes (Coley et al., 1985; Herms and Mattson, 1992), these findings suggested that growth promotion may be accompanied by a decreased basal defense response.
-  Next, we checked whether there was evidence of metabolite changes indicative of enhanced energy generating pathways.
- Many MPV-hybrid DEGs related to energy metabolism were up-regulated in the hybrids.
- For example, genes encoding enzymes involved in starch and sucrose metabolism (hexokinase, beta-glucosidase, and beta-fructofuranosidase) and those involved in the citrate cycle (SDH2, ACLY, and pdhC) and photosynthesis (genes encoding plastocyanin subunits) were up-regulated in the hybrids.
- Moreover, considering that the hybrids have stronger primary metabolism than the MPV at the seedling stage (Figure 2E), we checked whether metabolites related to energy metabolism showed similar patterns compared with the expression of their related genes.
- Consistent with our hypothesis, detectable metabolites related to energy metabolism showed obvious positive MPH, mainly involved in four key energy-generating processes: glycolysis, the citrate cycle, the pentose phosphate pathway, and photosynthesis (Figure 3D).
- Almost all of those were non-additive metabolites (P < 0.05).
- The combined results of the transcriptome and metabolome analyses suggested that stronger energy metabolism in the hybrids could produce more energy for plant growth than in the parental lines.
###  Dominant complementation leads to purple flowers and enhanced male fertility of F1 hybrids 
>- Heterosis is often hypothesized to be due to dominance, such that the phenotype of a given allele is fully displayed even when it is present in the heterozygous or heterokaryotic state (Chen, 2013).
- As a good example to explain the mechanism of dominance, to determine the causes of the synthetic purple-petal phenotype in the F1 hybrids, we first checked the metabolome data and found that cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside (purple-colored pigment) was the main anthocyanin in the hybrid flowers (Figure 4A, B).
- Notably, the parents contained very low levels of this metabolite.
- Moreover, the hybrids contained more dihydrokaempferol, an important precursor in the anthocyanin pathway (Figure 4B) demonstrating that the pathway to synthesize colored anthocyanins was incomplete in the parents.
- Next, we checked the expression pattern of genes associated with anthocyanin synthesis in the parental lines and hybrids.
- We identified several genes with opposite expression patterns in the two parents (UFGT was lower in A6-26; F3′H, DFR, ANS, and FlAN2 were lower in E4-63) but expressed similarly with the higher parent in the hybrids (Figure 4A).
- To determine which genes were responsible for flower color, we self-pollinated one F1 plant (A × E) and performed genetic mapping of flower color using the F2 population.
- As expected, the flower color segregated in the F2 population.
- We used purple- and white-flowered individuals as two pools for bulked segregant analysis.
- The mapping results showed there were two markedly distinct genetic loci controlling flower color (chr02: 37.5–42.9 Mb; chr10: 48.8–53.3 Mb) (Figure 4C).
- By integrating the genetic locations and expression patterns, we identified two candidate genes: the anthocyanin synthesis gene DFR (dihydroflavanol 4-reductase) and the anthocyanin regulation gene FlAN2, which were previously defined as the D gene and the F gene (De Jong et al., 2003; Laimbeer et al., 2020), respectively, for potato flower color.
- The transcriptome data showed FlAN2 is not expressed (fragments per kilobase of transcripts her million mapped reads (FPKM) = 0) in the E4-63 flowers.
- To validate this result, we performed reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR).
- Consistent with the RNA-seq data, FlAN2 was not expressed in E4-63, but was expressed in A6-26 and in the hybrids.
- However, DFR was expressed in flowers of both parents and the hybrids (Figure 4D).
- To further explore this, we analyzed the variations in the promoter sequence of FLAN2 and amino acid sequence of DFR in the two parental lines.
- Four large deletions were detected in E4-63's promoter compared with A6-26, and some motifs were identified in these deletions, which might lead to the inactivation of FLAN2 in E4-63 (Figure S4A).
- Then, using DFR (wild type) and dfr (mutant type from the white-flowered tetraploid cultivar Kennebec) as controls, sequence alignment results showed there were six missense mutations in the protein sequence of DFR between the two parental lines (Figure S4B).
- Furthermore, the DFR protein in A6-26 contained the same mutation sites as dfr from Kennebec, while the DFR protein in E4-63 was consistent with the wild-type DFR.
- In addition, overexpression of DFR (using the E4-63 allele) in a dfr potato mutant line changed the flower color to purple (Zhang et al., 2009), implying that the allele in A6-26 is malfunctioning.
- These findings demonstrated that the loss of function of DFR in A6-26 and the lack of expression of FlAN2 in E4-63 were responsible for the white flowers in the two parents, while the functional and expressional complementation of these two genes in the hybrids resulted in purple flowers.
-  As mentioned earlier, the pollen viability of the two F1 hybrids was much better than that of the parents (Figure 1C); therefore, we identified genes related to male fertility among the MPV-hybrid DEGs at the flowering stage.
- Many genes associated with fertility were up-regulated in the hybrids, including those involved in lipid metabolism, polysaccharide metabolism, and several well-known transcription factors, including LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARIES DOMAIN10 (LBD10) and TGACG motif-binding proteins 10 (TGA10) (Figure 4E).
- Lipid metabolism also plays a critical role in pollen development, especially for major fatty acids (Wan et al., 2019).
- In rice, the lack of three major fatty acids results in male sterility (Xue et al., 2018).
- Thus, we measured the contents of the main fatty acids of the parents and hybrids in the flower metabolome.
- Obvious positive MPH of several major fatty acids was observed in the hybrids, including linoleic acid, palmitic acid, and stearic acid (Figure 4F).
- The higher expression of fertility-related genes and increased content of fatty acids might be responsible for the fertility heterosis in the hybrids.
###  Dominant complementation of starch-related genes results in higher starch yield in the hybrids 
- The F1 hybrids showed significant yield heterosis (Figure 1A), but the contents of both primary and secondary metabolites at the tuber stage showed negative MPH (Figure S3C).
- One possible reason is most of the energy was used to synthesize starch, which is the major photosynthate accumulated in tubers (Liu et al., 2009; Van Harsselaar et al., 2017) but could not be detected by the UPLC-ESI-MS/MS system.
- Thus, we measured the starch and total protein content in the tubers.
- We observed significant positive MPH of starch and total protein contents in the hybrids (Figure 5A).
- Considering that the hybrid tuber yield was greatly improved, the increase of the total amount of starch and protein was even more significant.
- Furthermore, at the transcriptional level, the KEGG analyses showed that the MPV-hybrid DEGs were markedly enriched (FDR < 0.05) in the terms “starch and sucrose metabolism” and “plant hormone signal transduction” (Figure S5).
- Plant hormones play key regulatory roles during the development of tubers.
- Ethylene is responsible for stolon thickening, jasmonic acid is involved in tuber initiation, IAA can promote the expansion of tubers, and abscisic acid accelerates tuber formation, functioning as an anti-gibberellin (Aksenova et al., 2012).
- Consistent with the KEGG analyses, the tuber transcriptomes showed that many MPV-hybrids DEGs related to “starch and sucrose metabolism” and “plant hormone signal transduction” were up-regulated in the F1 hybrid tubers (Figure 5B).
- In addition, to find out whether the dominant complementary effect also plays a role in tuber heterosis, we checked the expression patterns of starch-related genes in parents and hybrids.
- Interestingly, genes associated with starch and sucrose metabolism showed obvious dominant complementation in hybrids.
- However, many genes with a lower expression level in A6-26 or E4-63 had a high expression level in hybrids (Figure 5C).
- These results suggested that in the hybrids, energy is prioritized for starch and total protein accumulation, which, when coupled with increased plant hormone signaling, contributes to tuber heterosis.
### Global methylation profile and DMRs in the hybrids and their parents 
>- To explore the role of DNA methylation in heterosis, we generated single-base resolution maps of methylated cytosines using bisulfite sequencing of both parents and the hybrids with three biological replicates at the three stages.
- In general, the global 5mC methylation level of E4-63 was higher than that of A6-26 and the two hybrids, especially for CG and CHG contexts, and there was no significant difference between the methylation levels in the hybrids and the MPV at all three stages (Figures 6A, S6A).
- Moreover, CG sites were predominantly highly methylated, followed by CHG sites, whereas CHH sites had more unmethylated cytosines (Figure S6B).
- Finally, only 7.31%–12.63% of the methylated sites were specific in the reciprocal hybrids, and most of the methylated sites (~90%) were similar to those in the parents (Figures 6B, S6C).
- Next, we characterized the methylation patterns of transposable element (TE) genes and non-TE genes in each cytosine context.
- All four genotypes showed a similar overall pattern of CG, CHG, and CHH methylation in both TE and non-TE genes.
- As reported previously (Shen et al., 2012), we observed increased methylation levels in the three cytosine contexts throughout the gene body of TEs (Figures 6C, S7A).
- The higher methylation level of E4-63 in both TE and non-TE genes was consistent with the global methylation pattern of all four genotypes.
-  To further investigate the role of methylation in heterosis, we identified differentially methylated regions (DMRs) between the parents and the hybrids.
- A large number of MPV-hybrid DMRs were identified at the three stages, suggesting a non-additive methylation interaction.
- Among these, about 35% of CG and CHG, and 80% of CHH DMRs were identified as hyper-DMRs.
- We then annotated the distribution of DMRs and observed that DMRs in the three cytosine contexts were all significantly enriched near the transcription start site at all three stages, indicating a potential regulation of gene expression (Figures 6D, S7B).
- Thus, we investigated the relationship of DMRs and DEGs.
- As expected, ~25%, 55%, and 56% of DEGs were differentially methylated (at least three DMRs in 2 kb upstream, the gene body, or 2 kb downstream regions) at the three stages, respectively.
- These data suggested that DNA methylation plays an essential role in heterosis by regulating gene expression.
###  The roles of ASEGs in heterosis and the mechanism of ASEGs 
- We used 5 207 925 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) between the two parents to identify ASEGs in the three tissues.
- All SNPs in ASEGs must show significant bias and were in the same direction (toward A6-26 or E4-63; see Methods).
- We identified 2 654, 2 831, and 2 714 ASEGs (including A6-26-biased and E4-63-biased) at the seedling, flowering, and tuber stages, respectively (Table S1).
- These genes showed the same direction in the two reciprocal hybrids.
- Comparison of all ASEGs revealed that 243 (A6-26-biased) and 171 (E4-63-biased) genes overlapped among the three stages.
- In addition, we also identified 145, 147, and 143 imprinted genes (including maternal and paternal) at the seedling, flowering, and tuber stages, respectively (Table S1).
- These imprinted genes always preferentially expressed toward female or male in the reciprocal hybrids and were unevenly distributed in the potato genome (Figure S8).
- Notably, eight maternal imprinted genes and 20 paternal imprinted genes showed consistent expression preference at all stages, and they were distributed mainly on chromosome 5 (Table S2).
- According to the annotation of the 28 imprinted genes, several types of these genes with similar domains were shown to be imprinted genes in Arabidopsis (Sanchez and Paszkowski, 2014; He et al., 2017), rice (Tonosaki et al., 2021), and human (Herzing et al., 2001) (Table S2), such as F-Box protein (St_C08G002536), PPR proteins (St_C05G000596, St_C00G039402, and St_C00G039425), zinc-finger domain protein (St_C05G000133), and P-ATPase (St_C05G000447).
-  To investigate the role of the ASEGs in heterosis, we performed Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG enrichment analyses using all ASEGs in each tissue.
- Consistent with recent reports (Gaur et al., 2013; Shao et al., 2019), the ASEGs were significantly enriched (FDR < 0.05) in the GO terms “response to stimulus,” “response to stress,” and processes related to energy metabolism at the seedling stage (Figure S9A, B).
- Enrichment of these terms reflected greater energy production and a broader tolerance to environmental stresses in the hybrids compared with the parental lines.
- Furthermore, the ASEGs were also enriched in the term “starch and sucrose metabolism” at the tuber stage (FDR = 0.012), including key starch structural genes such as sucrose synthase (St_C07G001347) and starch synthase (St_C03G001894) (Figure S9A, B).
- In summary, these data suggested that the dominant expression of these preponderant alleles could enable the hybrids to adapt to different environments and facilitate important developmental processes by using the preponderant alleles and express them at high levels.
- One allele may be more suitable than the other in one particular environment and vice versa.
- Such biased expression of the alleles would lead to partially or fully dominant effects on the traits regulated by the genes.
-  To further explore the mechanism of allele-specific expression (ASE), we first checked the expression level of ASEGs in the two parents.
- We determined that >80% of the ASEGs had higher expression in the biased parent (Figures 6E, S10A).
- This suggested that the expression levels of most of these genes in the hybrids was inherited from the expression pattern in the parents.
-  Previous studies have demonstrated that DNA methylation plays a critical role in ASE (Ma et al., 2021b).
- Therefore, we identified allele-specific methylation (ASM) sites in the hybrids and calculated the ASM levels of ASEGs (gene body and 2 kb 5′ and 3′ flanking regions) in the hybrids at CG, CHG, and CHH contexts.
- A higher ASM level was present in E4-63 in most regions, which was consistent with the high global methylation level in E4-63; however, in A6-26, the ASM level of CHH sites in gene body regions was lower in A6-26-biased ASEGs, but higher in E4-63-biased ASEGs (Figures 6F, S10B–D).
- Similarly, E4-63-biased ASEGs exhibited a lower CHH methylation level in E4-63 ASM sites at gene body regions compared to A6-26 ASM sites.
- These results indicated that ASEGs might be regulated by allele-specific CHH methylation, and ASM at CHH sites was negatively correlated with ASE, consistent with the repressive role of methylation in gene expression..
## Method {#Method}
### Plant materials and growth conditions 
- Two highly homozygous diploid potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) parents (A6-26 and E4-63) and their reciprocal F1 hybrids (A × E and E × A) were used in this study.
- The plants grew in a climate chamber under long-day conditions (16 h light/8 h dark at 25°C) for seedlings and flowers and short-day conditions (8 h light/16 h dark at 22°C) for tubers.
- The F2 population resulted from the self-fertilization A × E hybrid plant.
### Transcriptome and whole-genome bisulfite sequencing
- Samples from young leaves (the third node), flowers, and developing tubers were collected for transcriptome sequencing.
- All samples of each stage were collected at the same time of day and were isolated and sequenced in three biological replicates.
- Total RNA was extracted from the samples using the RNAprep Pure Plant Kit (Tiangen, China).
- Sequencing libraries were generated using the VAHTS mRNA-seq v2 Library Prep Kit and sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq platform to generate 6 GB of 150 bp paired-end reads by Berry Genomics Corporation (Beijing, China).
-  For whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS), genomic DNA was extracted from young leaves, flowers, and developing tubers using the cetrimonium bromide method (Gawel and Jarret, 1991) with three biological replicates.
- Then the DNA was fragmented to ~200–300 bp by sonication, followed by end repair, dA tailing, and methylated adaptor ligation.
- The WGBS library was sequenced on an Illumina Hiseq X10 sequencer as 30 GB of 150 bp paired-end reads by Annoroad Gene Technology (Beijing, China).
### Untargeted metabolomics sample extraction and UPLC conditions 
- Samples from young leaves (the third node), flowers, and mature tubers were freeze-dried by a vacuum freeze-dryer (Scientz-100F) and crushed using a mixer mill (MM 400, Retsch) with zirconia beads for 1.5 min at 30 Hz.
- One hundred milligrams of lyophilized powder were dissolved with 1.2 mL 70% methanol solution and vortexed for 30 s every 30 min for six times in total and placed in a refrigerator at 4°C overnight.
- Following centrifugation at 13,000 xg for 10 min, the extracts were filtered (SCAA-104, 0.22 μm pore size; ANPEL, Shanghai, China) before UPLC-MS/MS analysis was conducted.
-  The sample extracts were analyzed using an UPLC-ESI-MS/MS system (UPLC, SHIMADZU Nexera X2; MS, Applied Biosystems 4500 QTRAP).
- The conditions were as follows, UPLC: column, Agilent SB-C18 (1.8 µm, 2.1 × 100 mm); the mobile phase consisted of solvent A, pure water with 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B, acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.
- Sample measurements were performed with a gradient program that employed the starting conditions of 95% A, 5% B.
- Within 9 min, a linear gradient to 5% A, 95% B was programmed, and a composition of 5% A, 95% B was kept for 1 min.
- Subsequently, a composition of 95% A, 5.0% B was adjusted within 1.10 min and kept for 2.9 min.
- The flow velocity was set as 0.35 mL/min, the column oven was set to 40°C, and the injection volume was 4 μL.
- The effluent was alternatively connected to an ESI-triple quadrupole-linear ion trap (QTRAP)-MS.
### ESI-QTRAP-MS/MS 
- Linear ion trap (LIT) and triple quadrupole (QQQ) scans were acquired on the triple QQQ LIT MS (QTRAP), AB4500 QTRAP UPLC/MS/MS System, equipped with an ESI Turbo Ion-Spray interface, operating in positive and negative ion mode and controlled by Analyst 1.6.3 software (AB Sciex).
- The ESI source operation parameters were as follows: ion source, turbo spray; source temperature 550°C; ion spray voltage (IS) 5,500 V (positive ion mode)/-4,500 V (negative ion mode); ion source gas I (GSI), gas II (GSII), and curtain gas (CUR) were set at 50, 60, and 25 psi, respectively; the collision-activated dissociation was high.
- Instrument tuning and mass calibration were performed with 10 and 100 μmol/L polypropylene glycol solutions in QQQ and LIT modes, respectively.
- QQQ scans were acquired as multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) experiments with collision gas (nitrogen) set to medium.
- Declustering potential (DP) and collision energy (CE) for individual MRM transitions were done with further DP and CE optimization.
- A specific set of MRM transitions were monitored for each period according to the metabolites eluted within this period.
### Starch extraction of potato 
- The potato tubers were crushed for 5 min using a tissue crusher with a frequency of 50 Hz and washed twice with 50 mL of distilled water.
- The filtrate was transferred to a clean container and the pH was adjusted to 6.0 for precipitation.
- After precipitated for 5 min, 15 mL of 95% ethanol was added to the filtrate, and then the supernatant was removed.
- The wet starch was washed using distilled water three times.
- After washing, the wet starch was dried for 48 h using a freeze dryer.
### RNA-seq data analysis and identification of DEGs 
- Sequencing data were filtered, and the low-quality data and adapter were removed using fastp (v0.21.0) (Chen et al., 2018b).
- The clean reads were mapped to the E4-63 genome (solomics.agis.caas.cn/potatohub) using hisat2 (Kim et al., 2019), and the FPKM value was calculated by StringTie (Pertea et al., 2015).
- DEGs were identified based on the FPKM value with a significance threshold of P < 0.05, FDR < 0.01, and at least one-fold change difference.
- P-value was calculated by Student's t-test.
- GO and KEGG analyses were performed using online tools (http://www.omicshare.com/tools).
- The heatmap was created by Tbtools (Chen et al., 2018a).
### WGBS data analysis and identification of DMRs 
- The WGBS reads from each sample were filtered, and the low-quality data and adapter were removed using fastp (v0.21.0) (Chen et al., 2018b).
- The clean reads were mapped to the E4-63 genome (solomics.agis.caas.cn/potatohub), and positional DNA methylation levels were computed using Bismark (v0.23.0) (Krueger and Andrews, 2011).
- Only the uniquely mapped reads were used for analysis.
- To identify DMRs, the whole genome was divided into 100 bp bins.
- Bins that contained at least 10 cytosines each and every cytosine with at least a five-fold coverage were retained.
- Bins with absolute methylation difference of 0.6, 0.5, and 0.2 for CG, CHG, and CHH sites, respectively, P < 0.05 (Fisher's exact test), and FDR < 0.01 between comparisons were considered DMRs.
- The P and FDR were calculated by R scripts.
- DMRs within 200 bp of each other were merged using BEDTools package of Python.
- Then, we used the R package clusterProfiler (Yu et al., 2012) to annotate DMRs.
### ASEG and imprinted gene identification 
- To identify ASEGs, we first called SNPs between A6-26 and E4-63, and then 50G of A6-26 DNA resequencing reads was mapped to the E4-63 genome (solomics.agis.caas.cn/potatohub) using bwa (Li and Durbin, 2009) (v0.7.5a-r405).
- A total of 5 207 925 SNPs between A6-26 and E4-63 were identified by GATK (McKenna et al., 2010) (v4.1.2.0).
- Then, we used the SNP database as reference for ASEG calling.
- First, the clean reads of transcriptomes of A × E and E × A were mapped to the E4-63 genome by STAR (Dobin et al., 2013) (v2.7.7a), and the <font color="red">RNA SNPs were called by GATK RNAseq short variant discovery workflows</font>.
- For each gene, the ASEGs were identified by SNPs as described previously (Shao et al., 2019) and slightly modified, which met the following requirements: (1) every SNP was supported by no less than five reads; (2) the SNP index from the two parental alleles differed from 1:1 (>0.7 for A6-26-biased and <0.3 for E4-63 biased); (3) the significant bias of different SNPs of the same gene were in the same directions; and (4) the gene was considered ASEG only if it was identified in at least two out of three biological replicates.
- For imprinted gene identification, for each gene, the SNP index was >0.7 in A × E and <0.3 in E × A for maternal imprinted genes or <0.3 in A × E and >0.7 in E × A for paternal imprinted genes.
###  RT-qPCR 
- The RNA was reverse transcribed using the PrimeScript RT reagent kit (Takara).
- RT-qPCR was performed with the StepOnePlus System (Applied Biosystems) using TB Green Premix Ex Taq GC (Takara).
- The reaction procedure was 95°C for 30 s, 95°C for 5 s, and 60°C for 30 s for 40 cycles.
- Actin was used as the internal control gene.
- All analyses were conducted with four biological replicates.
- The relative gene expression levels were calculated using the method..

## Discussion {#Discussion}  
- Since heterosis was discovered, it has been exploited to improve yield, especially in seed crops such as maize and rice (Reed, 1942).
- However, the use of heterosis is rarely reported in clonally propagated crops.
- In our previous studies, we developed an inbred line-based hybrid potato breeding system, which enabled us to exploit heterosis in the tuber crop (Zhang et al., 2021).
- The first potato F1 hybrid exhibits strong heterosis throughout the entire growth period.
- Here, we integrated transcriptome, metabolome, and DNA methylation data to explain the molecular basis of heterosis in potato.
-  Our data showed that energy metabolism played important roles in heterosis at the seedling, flowering, and tuber stages in potato.
- For instance, at the seedling stage, we observed higher expression of energy-related genes and greater accumulation of energy-related metabolites, especially higher levels of primary metabolites in both hybrids, implying stronger energy metabolism in the hybrids (Figures 2D, 3D, 7, S3A).
- Moreover, hybrid seedlings might have improved auxin signaling for better growth (Figure 3C).
- Notably, down-regulated expression of basal defense-related genes may result in reduced disease resistance in hybrid seedlings (Figure 3C).
- These results indicated a propensity for growth over disease resistance (Figure 7).
- When there is no disease infestation, these hybrids may have an overall lower basal defense response but are able to put more energy into metabolism, thus explaining their heterosis.
- Dominance is a prevalent hypothesis for heterosis.
- Functional and expressional complementation are the major players in the dominance hypothesis (Huang et al., 2015; Baldauf et al., 2018; Shao et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2021).
- Traditionally a clonally propagated crop, only recently has it been possible to convert potato to a seed crop (Zhang et al., 2021).
- In this study, the initial establishment of heterosis in diploid potato was mainly due to dominant complementation.
- To better understand the dominant model, we used flower color as a specific example, even though this is not a heterosis trait.
- We found that the functional and expressional complementation lead to purple flowers in the hybrids.
- Loss of function of DFR in A6-26 and lack of expression of FlAN2 in E4-63 caused white flowers in the parents, while complementation by the two dominant alleles resulted in purple flowers in the F1 hybrid (Figures 1A, 4A–D, 7).
- Moreover, the gene dominance enhanced male fertility in hybrids.
- Similar with the flowering stage, in the tuber, genes related to starch and sucrose metabolism also showed obvious dominant complementation, which resulted in higher starch accumulation in hybrids (Figures 5C, 7).
- ASE is another type of gene expression complementation.
- The development of high-throughput sequencing technology has made it possible for genome-wide identification of ASEGs.
- We have identified thousands of ASEGs and dozens of imprinted genes at each stage (Table S1).
- These genes facilitated stronger environmental adaptability at the seedling stage and higher starch content in the hybrid tubers (Figure S9).
- Such biased expression would lead to partially or fully dominant effects on the traits, which could directly contribute to the establishment of heterosis.
- Heterosis is a result of the interaction of genomes, leading to complex changes at the genetic, metabolic, and epigenetic levels (Chen, 2013).
- The single-omics approach is often not suitable for studying complex biological phenotypes.
- For example, a change in phenotype does not mean a change at the transcriptional level.
- The transcriptome cannot help to identify genes that are normally expressed but have lost functions (such as DFR).
- Here, our multi-omics analyses revealed global changes in biological pathways and phenotypic traits in potato hybrids.
- In addition, only a few genes associated with important agronomic traits have been identified in potato.
- Thus, more detailed studies of heterosis will require genetic dissection of the key loci or genes contributing to heterosis in potato using F2 or other segregating populations.
- Future studies will focus on identifying heterosis-related loci and cloning the underlying genes..
## Fig {#Fig} 
