---
title: 马铃薯设计育种优薯一号
subtitle:
date: 2024-12-09T10:01:59+08:00
draft: false
type: posts
author:
  name:
  link:
  email:
  avatar:
description:
keywords:
license:
comment: false
weight: 0
tags:
  - 文献阅读
categories:
  - 文献阅读
hiddenFromHomePage: false
hiddenFromSearch: false
summary:
resources:
  - name: featured-image
    src: featured-image.jpg
  - name: featured-image-preview
    src: featured-image-preview.jpg
toc: true
math: false
lightgallery: false
password:
message:
repost:
  enable: true
  url:

# See details front matter: https://fixit.lruihao.cn/documentation/content-management/introduction/#front-matter
---

题目：[Genome design of hybrid potato](https://www.cell.com/cell/fulltext/S0092-8674(21)00707-8?_returnURL=https%3A%2F%2Flinkinghub.elsevier.com%2Fretrieve%2Fpii%2FS0092867421007078%3Fshowall%3Dtrue)  
文章单位：深圳基因组所  
通讯作者：[黄三文](https://www.agis.org.cn/kydw/kydwyjzx/hcswxyjzx/963590f8392b440fbf551c15e1bb579f.htm) 
第一作者：[张春芝](https://www.agis.org.cn/kydw/yjspy/dsjs/b1b3d4de0ac24849ae27c8d1f1693d14.htm) 
公众号推文：[1](https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/CUZrOwef_urbUIImnxitIQ)、[2](https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/zJ56glYAzCgWZzF4D4IOXQ)
- [Abstract](#Abstract)
- [Introduction](#Introduction)
- [Result](#Result)
- [Method](#Method)
- [Fig](#Fig)


## Abstract 

&emsp; Reinventing potato from a clonally propagated tetraploid into a seed-propagated diploid, hybrid potato, is an important innovation in agriculture. Due to deleterious mutations, it has remained a challenge to develop highly homozygous inbred lines, a prerequisite to breed hybrid potato. Here, we employed genome design to develop a generation of pure and fertile potato lines and thereby the uniform, vigorous F1s. The metrics we applied in genome design included the percentage of genome homozygosity and the number of deleterious mutations in the starting material, the number of segregation distortions in the S1 population, the haplotype information to infer the break of tight linkage between beneﬁcial and deleterious alleles, and the genome complementarity of the parental lines. This study transforms potato breeding from a slow, non-accumulative mode into a fast-iterative one, thereby potentiating a broad spectrum of beneﬁts to farmers and consumers.

- tetraploid 四倍体; uniform 全部一致的; homozygosity 纯合性; segregation distortions 分离畸变(偏分离？); potentiate 加强；赋与力量

## Introduction {#Introduction}

&emsp; The most important tuber crop, potato (Solanum tuberosum L.), is a staple food for some 1.3 billion people worldwide (Stokstad, 2019). However, compared with other major crops, the genetic gains in potato have been small. The complexity of tetrasomic inheritance is the key factor hampering the genetic improvement of cultivated potato. For example, the 119-year-old Russet Bur-bank is still the foremost processing cultivar, despite it being susceptible to many major diseases (Bethke et al., 2014). Clonal propagation is another constraint for the potato industry, involving ~10% of the total production costs, and bears a very signiﬁcant carbon footprint for tuber production associated with pest control, storage, and shipment to farmers.

- genetic gains 遗传进展,遗传获得量; tetrasomic 四倍体的; inheritance 遗传特征; foremost 最重要的; processing cultivar 加工品种; 

&emsp; To address these problems, several groups began efforts to reinvent potato into an inbred-line-based diploid crop, propagated by seeds (Jansky et al., 2016; Li et al., 2013; Lindhout et al., 2011). Actually, <font color="darkred"><b>~70% of the natural potato germplasm, including wild species and landraces, are diploid (Spooner et al., 2014)</font></b>, the extensive diversity of which has yet to be exploited. Sophisticated genetic populations, such as recombinant inbred lines (RILs), introgression lines (ILs), multi-parent advanced generation intercrosses populations (MAGICs), and nested association mapping populations (NAMs), can be developed using inbred lines of various lineages to facilitate trait gene discovery. Breeding with inbred lines is a fast and iterative process, using backcrossing to incorporate one or few beneﬁcial alleles once in a generation, a process not amenable with auto-tetraploid breeding, which is essentially non-accumulative. Therefore, reinventing potato into a seed crop, hybrid potato,would lead to a ‘‘green revolution’’ in the potato industry, with immense beneﬁts for consumers.

- exploited 利用,开发; incorporate 合并; amenable 有责任的：顺从的，服从的；有义务的；经得起检验的; auto-tetraploid 同源四倍体

&emsp; The concept of hybrid potato breeding is not new (Alme-kinders et al., 2009), but it was long considered to be impractical. To make a hybrid of sufﬁcient heterosis and uniformity, the <font color="darkred"><b>two parental lines require high genome homozygosity, adequate vigor and fertility, and a reasonable degree of genetic divergence</font></b>. In this regard, there are two major obstacles to be overcome. The ﬁrst obstacle lies in the fact that most diploid lines are self-incompatible. A pioneer work here was the discovery and introgression of the  <font color="darkred"><b>S-locus inhibitor (Sli) gene, from the wild species S. chacoense</font></b>, a dominant locus that renders self-compatibility in diploid potato, making selﬁng possible (Hosaka and Hanneman, 1998). Alternative solutions include using genome editing to <font color="darkred"><b>knock out the S-RNase gene</font></b>, a major determinant of self-incompatibility (Enciso-Rodriguez et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2018), and searching for natural mutants of S-RNase (Zhang et al., 2019). More difﬁcult to solve is the second obstacle, inbreeding depression, mainly caused by deleterious recessive alleles, whose detrimental effects would be exposed through selﬁng (Charlesworth and Willis, 2009). Thus, elimination of deleterious mutations is crucial for development of pure inbred lines.

- impractical 不明智的，不切实际的; recessive 隐形的; detrimental 有害的，不利的

&emsp; However, even in a self-compatible diploid clone, purging of deleterious mutations, to obtain a highly homozygous inbred line, is not as straightforward as expected. After the initial successful conceptual test of hybrid potato breeding, by re-searchers at the Solynta Company and Wageningen University (Lindhout et al., 2011), over the ensuing decade of selﬁng and selection, the homozygosity of inbred lines remained low. Recently, a self-compatible diploid inbred line, <font color="darkred"><b>termed ‘‘Solyntus,’’</font></b> was de novo assembled, but unfortunately, > 20% of the Solyntus genome is <font color="darkred">still heterozygous, even for this F9 inbred line</font></b> (van Lieshout et al., 2020). In practical breeding, 20% of genome heterozygosity means too many traits will be segregating; hence, this low homozygosity will limit the uniformity and commercialization of any resultant F1 hybrids (Stokstad, 2019). Clearly, these outcomes indicate that the conventional selﬁng and selection approach, as a breeding strategy, is ineffective in achieving the highly anticipated breeding outcomes.

- ensuing 因而发生的，随后的; conventional 依照惯例的，遵循习俗的；老一套的，习惯的；常规的; anticipated 受期待的，让人期盼的

&emsp; The reason why it is difﬁcult to develop elite inbred lines, with high homozygosity, is due to the nature of the potato genome. One could argue that, during the 1930s, elite maize inbred lines were already generated (Duvick, 2005). Maize, as a diploid, can be propagated efﬁciently by sexual reproduction, and therefore deleterious alleles with large effect were most likely eliminated prior to inbred line development. In contrast, potato has been propagated asexually through vegetative tubers for thousands of years, and hence, deleterious alleles with large effect are ‘‘hidden’’ in the genome, at the heterozygous state (Lian et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020), as also shown in other clonally propagated crops (Zhou et al., 2019). Therefore, inbreeding depression in clonally propagated plants is expected to be more severe than that in seed plants, which increases the difﬁculties to develop inbred lines.

- prior to 在……之前，先于; asexually 无性地；无性生殖

&emsp; A recent haplotype-resolved genome map of RH89-039-16 (RH), a heterozygous diploid potato line, showed that deleterious alleles were dispersed throughout both haplotypes (Zhou et al., 2020), which further complicates strategies to eradicate deleterious alleles, or to stack beneﬁcial alleles, via meiotic recombination. Phenotypic selection would be difﬁcult to break the linkage of two tightly linked deleterious mutations in the repulsion phase, resulting in the high heterozygosity of inbred lines, even after multiple generations of selﬁng. To overcome these obstacles in developing elite inbred lines, an indepth understanding of the potato genomes is required.
In this study, we show how to develop pure inbred lines and vigorous F1 hybrids, through genome design, which applies genome analyses for decision making in the entire process of inbred line development and creation of F1s.

- heterozygous 杂合的; eradicate 消灭; meiotic 减数分裂; repulsion 排斥 反驳


## Result{#Result}

### Pipeline for genome design in potato hybrid breeding 

&emsp; We developed a pipeline to carry out potato hybrid breeding by genome design (Figure 1). This pipeline involved four steps, <font color="darkred"><b>with the ﬁrst</font></b> being to select or create, as starting materials, self-compatible diploid clones with low genomic heterozygosity. <font color="darkred"><b>The second step</font></b> involved analysis of the S1 population of this starting material to identify the segregation distortion regions (SDs) and genetic loci carrying large-effect deleterious mutations or controlling agronomic traits. <font color="darkred"><b>Next</font></b>, it is critical to develop highly homozygous inbred lines, by continuous selﬁng and genome-assisted selection, to purge deleterious mutations and stack beneﬁcial alleles. Finally, the inbred lines, derived from different lineages, are crossed and F1 hybrids then evaluated for performance. In the following sections we document the experimental platforms employed to establish this pipeline to develop pure potato inbred lines and vigorous F1 hybrids.

### Selection of the starting materials

> 打破自交不亲和  

&emsp; In nature, nearly all diploid potatoes are self-incompatible, which is controlled by the highly polymorphic S-RNase alleles (Takayama and Isogai, 2005). To develop inbred lines from heterozygous diploid clones, it is necessary to break self-incompatibility. In this study, we <font color="darkred"><b>used four diploid clones, belonging to different subgroups (Figure S1)</font></b>, to create inbred lines. <font color="darkred"><b>PG6359 and RH are two natural self-compatible accessions</font></b>, which have previously been reported (Clot et al., 2020; Peterson et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2019). The self-compatibility in PG6359 was conferred by a low-expressed S-RNase allele, Ss11 (Zhang et al., 2019). For the other two clones, CIP701165 and CIP703767, they were self-incompatible, which was overcome by introgression of the Sli gene from a breeding line E172 (Figures S2A and S2B). <font color="darkred"><b>Two BC1 clones, C10-20 and E86-69, derived from CIP701165 and CIP703767, respectively, were selected to develop inbred lines</font></b>. Development of these inbred lines, carrying different self-compatibility genes, could avoid the detrimental effects of any deleterious mutations, linked with either self-compatibility gene, being exposed in the F1 hybrids.


&emsp; Another crucial feature of the starting material is the number of deleterious mutations. Such deleterious substitutions were predicted based on amino acid conservation, using the <font color="darkred"><b>SIFT algorithm</font></b> (Vaser et al., 2016). We analyzed the genomes of 153 diploid clones and found that genomic heterozygosity is positively correlated with the number of deleterious mutations (Figure 2A). Among the four clones used in this study, <font color="darkred"><b>PG6359 and E86-69</font></b> harbor relatively less mutations. Genomic analysis revealed that PG6359 contains several large homozygous segments (Zhang et al., 2019), covering 12.17% of the entire genome. Since this clone is self-compatible, we inferred that some large-effect deleterious mutations had been purged, either during selﬁng or inbreeding. Likewise, due to backcrossing, some genomic regions in E86-69 were already homozygous (Figure S2C), covering 35.47% of the entire genome. Using these two clones, we could successfully develop highly homozygous inbred lines.


&emsp; However, for RH and C10-20, we failed to develop inbred lines. These two clones contain relatively more deleterious mutations (Figure 2A), and their progeny became very weak and seldom ﬂowered after two generations of selﬁng. Analysis of a small S1 population from each clone showed that the SDs in RH and C10-20 are more than that in PG6359 and E86-69 (Figure 2B), which increases the difﬁculty in developing pure inbred lines. Thus, the starting material, with lower heterozygosity and fewer deleterious mutations, offers a greater potential for development into inbred lines.


### Genetic analyses of S1 population and identiﬁcation of large-effect deleterious mutations

&emsp; The second step in the genome design pipeline is to carry out genetic analyses using the S1 population of the starting material. Here, we will use the diploid clone PG6359 as an example to illustrate how to develop homozygous inbred lines from a heterozygous diploid clone. We sequenced 825 S1 individuals of PG6359, among which 256 plants could set fruit after artiﬁcial self-pollination. Then we analyzed the genome-wide SDs, at the seedling and fruit-setting stages. The SDs on chromosome 1 (chr. 1), chr. 3, and chr. 12 were found to be the same at both developmental stages (Figures S3A and S3B), indicating that these SDs are associated to the early-stage characters, such as gametic or zygotic survival, growth vigor, etc. In a previous study, we mapped the self-compatibility gene Ss11 and the leaf chlorosis gene yl1 on chr. 1 and chr. 12, respectively (Zhang et al., 2019). At the fruit-setting stage, an additional SD was detected on chr. 2 (Figure S3B), implicating it as being related to fertility or other late-stage traits.

- gametic 配子的; zygotic 合子的; chlorosis 变色病; 

&emsp; Due to the reliance on asexual propagation in potato, some genes controlling fertility were negatively selected (Hardigan et al., 2017), an important point for consideration, as fertility is a crucial factor to the development of inbred lines. In addi-tion, because of inbreeding depression, some selfed progeny showed very weak fertility or male sterility. Understanding these deleterious mutations affecting fertility is essential for developing inbred lines. In the progeny of PG6359, the ﬂoral buds of some plants aborted before ﬂowering; this trait was designated as ﬂoral bud abortion 1 (fba1)(Figure 3A). Very few ﬂowers on these plants blossomed, and for those that did, their pollen was sterile.

&emsp; Bulked segregant analysis revealed that fba1 was controlled by a single locus on chr. 2, which co-localized with the SD on chr. 2 (Figure 3B). Further studies mapped fba1 to a 11 kb interval containing three annotated genes (Figure 3C; Table S1). Among them, PGSC0003DMG400021719, encoding a bHLH transcrip-tion factor, was speciﬁcally expressed in the stamen and its expression was depressed in mutant plants (Figure S3C; Fig-ure 3D). The Arabidopsis orthologous gene DYT1 is required for anther development (Cui et al., 2016). Knockout of StDYT1 in potato resulted in the same phenotype as fba1 (Figures 3E and 3F), so we conﬁrmed that StDYT1 regulates stamen devel-opment in potato and its mutation represents a major deleterious allele affecting fertility.

&emsp; The selfed progeny of PG6359 also showed diverse variations in tuber-related traits, with tuber size and tuber number per plant showing a continuous distribution (Figures S3D and S3E), indi-cating that these traits are controlled by multiple loci. In contrast, tuber shape and ﬂesh color exhibited characteristics of qualita-tive traits. Bulked segregant analysis located the locus control-ling round tuber shape to chr. 10 (Figure S3F), corresponding to the Ro gene (Bonierbale et al., 1988; Van Eck et al., 1994). As long and round tuber shapes have different commercial values, and no SD colocalizes with this trait, both haplotypes were kept in our breeding project. The locus controlling ﬂesh co-lor was mapped to chr. 3 (Figure S3G), corresponding to the Y gene (Kloosterman et al., 2010). The yellow ﬂesh allele Y, located on haplotype B, controls carotenoid accumulation, a nutritional trait. In addition, the haplotype A, carrying the white ﬂesh allele y, showed distorted segregation (Figure S3B), indicating that it is linked with a large-effect deleterious mutation. Thus, the haplotype A needs to be purged during the development of inbred lines.

###  Breaking the close linkage of two deleterious mutations in repulsion phases

&emsp; Based on the above genetic analyses, we designed a pipeline to eliminate deleterious or undesirable alleles as well as stack beneﬁcial alleles. First, we selected S1 individuals carrying four beneﬁcial alleles (Ss11 for self-compatibility, YL1 for normal leaves, FBA1 for fertility, and Y for yellow ﬂesh) to be selfed. Next, we assessed the performance and homozygosity of the resultant S2 plants to select individuals with relatively high homo-zygosity and desired traits for seed collection. Finally, using the same selection criteria, the resultant population was further self-pollinated, for 2–4 times, to ultimately obtain inbred lines with high homozygosity.

&emsp; The average genome homozygosity of S1 plants was 48.32%, varying from 19.30% to 74.76%. We selected 86 S1 individuals, containing the above four traits, to develop inbred lines. About 9,000 S2 plants were transplanted into the greenhouse, and at the seedling stage, all plants with leaf chlorosis or weak growth vigor were removed. The re-maining plants were manually self-pollinated. Based on growth vigor, fruit setting, and tuber-related traits, 116 S2 in-dividuals were selected and re-sequenced. Unexpectedly, we observed a peak of heterozygous regions at the end of chr. 12 (ST4.03ch12: 60,229,075–61,165,650) (Figure 4A). Among the selected 116 S2 plants, 107 were heterozygous at this locus. As haplotype B carries the deleterious allele yl1, its homozygotes were discarded at the seedling stage. But the homozygous haplotype A was also seldom selected, so we re-analyzed this locus using the S1 population. Here, we found that the homozygous haplotype A showed signiﬁ-cantly distorted segregation, the ratio of which is only 1.98%, far below a quarter (Figure 4B). This indicates haplo-type A contains a large-effect deleterious mutation, affecting the survival of homozygotes, designated as large-effect dele-terious mutation 1 (led1). To develop inbred lines, it is neces-sary to break the tight linkage between these two deleterious mutations in repulsion phases.

&emsp; Fortunately, due to the relatively high recombination rate at the end of chr. 12, we identiﬁed four S1 recombinants in this region. The leaf color of the recombinant R1 was green, and its S2 progeny showed segregation in their leaf color, indi-cating that yl1 was located downstream of bin128 (Figure 4C). Leaf color of the recombinant R2 and its S2 progeny was green, and its S2 progeny showed distorted segregation in bin124, suggesting that the other deleterious mutation, led1, was located upstream of bin125 (Figure 4D). According to the genotype and phenotype of these two S1 recombinants and their S2 progeny, we concluded that the close linkage be-tween two deleterious mutations was broken. In the S2 population, we obtained nine individuals carrying the beneﬁ-cial alleles, LED1 and YL1, in the coupling phase (Figure 4E), all of which were derived from the R2 recombinant. This demonstrates that, with phenotype-based selection, it is sometimes impossible to identify and purge the closely linked deleterious mutations in the repulsion phases. In this case, genomic analysis and selection is essential.

### Development of highly homozygous inbred lines by genome-assisted selection

&emsp; Although the average homozygosity of S2 plants increased to 72.76% (Figure 5A), the number of heterozygous regions had not decreased (p = 0.81) (Figure 5B). We further found that the number of crossovers in the S2 progeny increased by 50.21% (p = 1.40 3 10􀀁33)(Figure 5C), indicating that new crossovers occurred within heterozygous regions. For example, in a heterozygous region on chr. 1, a total of 11 crossovers were detected in 9 S2 individuals from the same family (Fig-ure S4A). To accelerate the puriﬁcation of inbred lines, those S2 plants with genome homozygosity <70% were eliminated, and seeds of the remaining 79 plants were sown. Finally, 44 S3 families (~8,000 plants) with high germination rate were transplanted for further study.

&emsp; According to the same selection process, this population continued to be selfed for a further two generations. Finally, we obtained multiple highly homozygous inbred lines carrying the beneﬁcial alleles (Figure 5D). The average homozygosity of S5 plants was raised to 97.54% (91.79%–99.94%) (Figure 5A). With an increase in homozygosity, in advanced inbred lines, the number and length of the heterozygous regions in each gen-eration consistently underwent a decrease. In the S5 generation, more than 95% of the heterozygous regions were shorter than 10 Mb (Figures S4B and S4C).

### Generation of vigorous F1 hybrids

&emsp; Employing the same pipeline, we also developed inbred lines us-ing a vigorous and self-compatible clone, E86-69. Among 500 S1 plants of E86-69, 262 individuals bearing fruit, by selﬁng, were re-sequenced and used to construct the bin map. Only two re-gions with strong SD were identiﬁed (c2 test, p < 1E􀀁10) (Fig-ure S5A). The number of SDs is crucial for developing inbred lines; lower SDs facilitate development of inbred lines. No visible phenotypic defect was linked with the SD on chr. 4 and hence we only selected the beneﬁcial haplotype, at this locus, and did not perform further analyses. In another study, we conﬁrmed that the SD on chr. 12 was caused by the self-compatibility gene Sli (Y. Shang et al., personal communication). Only the pollen carrying the Sli gene could penetrate the style and complete the double fertilization, whereas growth of pollen tubes without Sli was inhibited, which caused the observed segregation distortion. Ac-cording to this mechanism, all selfed progeny were self-compat-ible. Thus, it was unnecessary to make selections at this locus.

&emsp; The average homozygosity of S1 plants was 63.85%, varying from 43.16% to 81.25% (Figure S5B). The seeds from 44 S1 plants, with homozygosity >70%, were germinated for devel-oping inbred lines. After another two generations of selﬁng, the average homozygosity was increased to 91.85% and 23 S3 plants had homozygosity higher than 95% (Figure S5B). Different from the PG6359 population, the number of heterozygous re-gions in the E86-69 population consistently decreased along with the continuous increase of crossovers (Figures S5C and S5D).

&emsp; With the availability of two sets of inbred lines, derived from different lineages, we made crosses between them (Figure S6A; Table S2). As expected, the performance of F1 hybrids between homozygous inbred lines was very uniform, whereas those derived from heterozygous parental lines showed a great segre-gation in tuber traits (Figure S6A). Moreover, the inbred-line-based F1 hybrids had strong heterosis in growth vigor and yield in the greenhouse (Figures 6A and 6B). Compared with parental lines, the yield of these F1 hybrids was increased by at least 31%(Figure 6C). For the combination A6-10 3 E4-64, the F1 hybrid yield was 3.38 times that of the mid-parent value.

&emsp; The mini-tubers, harvested from true-seed plants, were grown in the ﬁeld, in Dehong (24􀀂430N and 98􀀂580E), Yunnan Province, to test the yield potential of these F1 hybrids. Due to severe inbreeding depression, the resultant inbred lines performed very weakly in the ﬁeld, and only a few tubers could be har-vested. In contrast, the F1 plants grew well under these ﬁeld con-ditions, and the average yield was twice that obtained in the greenhouse (Figure 6D). Furthermore, these F1 tubers were rich in carotenoids (59.63–72.06 mg∙kg-1 fry weight) and dry matter (23.10%–26.02%) (Figure 6E; Table S2). Unexpectedly, due to the self-compatibility and recovered fertility, the F1 hybrids pro-duced abundant fruits (Figure 6D; Figure S6B), which competed with the underground tubers for nutrients.

### Genome complementarity of two inbred lines

&emsp; To preliminarily explore the genetic basis of heterosis in F1 hy-brids, we de novo assembled the genomes for the two parents of the F1 hybrid H1, A6-26 (homozygosity = 98.16%) and E4-63 (homozygosity = 98.52%), using Pacbio HiFi reads. The assembled genome sizes of A6-26 and E4-63 were 748 Mb (contig N50 = 2.64 Mb) and 740 Mb (contig N50 = 3.89 Mb), respectively (Table S3). More than 98% of the sequences of these two genomes were categorized and anchored to 12 su-per-scaffolds, representing 12 pseudo-chromosomes, and some 97% of embryophyta BUSCO genes could be aligned to each assembly. The average alignment rate of transcrip-tome data from A6-26 and E4-63 was 97.46% and 97.75%, respectively. These data demonstrated the high continuity and completeness of these two genomes. We annotated 37,948 and 37,214 high-conﬁdence protein-coding genes for A6-26 and E4-63, respectively. Comparisons with the potato reference genome DM1-3 516 R44 (hereafter referred as DM) revealed 12,023 speciﬁcally identiﬁed genes in these two inbred lines (Figure S7). As DM is male-sterile and has de-fects in tuber development, these two inbred lines could be used as reference genomes to study fertility and tuber devel-opment of potato, as well as other important biological processes.

&emsp; In addition, we also compared the genetic variants be-tween DM and these two inbred lines. For each assembly, some three million variants were identiﬁed (Table 1). The overlapped SNP, indels, and structural variations between A6-26 and E4-63 were 11.55%, 11.35%, and 16.91%, respectively, indicating that nearly 90% variants should be heterozygous in their F1 hybrid. We further predicted 10,994 and 11,093 deleterious substitutions in A6-26 and E4-63, respectively, but only 8.36% were overlapped, sug-gesting that the detrimental effects of most deleterious substitutions will be masked in F1 hybrid. These deleterious substitutions involve 7,414 genes, among which 2,217 genes showed differential expression in the tubers of A6-26 and E4-63. The genomic complementarity of two inbred lines, to some extent, may explain the heterosis of the F1 hybrid.

## Discussion{#Discussion}

&emsp; The core mission of hybrid potato breeding is to develop highly homozygous inbred lines derived from different lineages. High residual heterozygosity, in inbred lines, will result in segregations in the F1 hybrids, reducing their commercial quality. Here, we used genome design approach to facilitate inbred line develop-ment, and therefore, hybrid potato breeding. In contrast to tradi-tional phenotype-based selection, we employed the following metrics in genome design. First, we evaluated the percentage of genome homozygosity and the number of deleterious muta-tions in the starting material. The material with lower genome heterozygosity and less deleterious mutations indicates a greater potential for development into inbred lines. Second, we inferred the number of SDs present in the genome, by sequencing the S1 population, as these are often associated with large-effect deleterious alleles. Third, we selected the plants containing the beneﬁcial alleles and analyzed the haplotype information to infer the break of tight linkage between beneﬁcial and deleterious alleles; we also evaluated the genome homozy-gosity and selected individuals with relatively high homozygosity for continued selﬁng. Lastly, we calculated the genome comple-mentarity of inbred lines to choose the parental lines for vigorous F1 hybrid production.

&emsp; Some SDs do not colocalize with visible morphological de-fects, which can only be identiﬁed and purged by genomic selection. In addition, by analyzing the segregation of different genotypes and the co-localized deleterious traits, we could then infer whether there were large-effect deleterious alleles, closely linked in repulsion phases. This situation is common in the potato genome, such as the two detrimental alleles, ar1 and ws1, on chr. 1 of the heterozygous diploid clone RH (Zhou et al., 2020). In this study, we also identiﬁed two linked deleterious mutations in repulsion phases at the end of chr. 12. Due to the high recombination rate in this region, their link-age could be broken. However, in cases that might occur in the low-recombination region, especially in the pericentromeric re-gion, it would be difﬁcult to break this linkage and obtain highly homozygous inbred lines.

&emsp; It is important to note that, in this study, we identiﬁed only dele-terious mutations with large effects that could easily be identiﬁed by SDs or obvious morphological defects. However, inbred lines carrying the beneﬁcial alleles, at all these loci, still showed reduced growth vigor, fertility, and yield, compared with the orig-inal heterozygous diploid clone. This indicates that the inbred lines accumulated many homozygous deleterious mutations of minor or medium effects, the harmful effects of which were exposed and caused severe ﬁtness costs. To effectively identify deleterious mutations, it is necessary to have a deep under-standing of the potato genomes, from an evolutionary perspec-tive. To this end, we are working with international teams to sequence multiple species representing the diversity of the Sol-anaceae family. In the long run, by the development and employ-ment of improved algorithms, we may develop the capacity to predict the minor- to medium-effect deleterious mutations for repair by genome editing.

&emsp; In this study, by crossing two inbred lines, derived from different sub-species, we achieved F1 hybrids displaying strong heterosis. A recent pilot ﬁeld trial in Dehong, Yunnan Province, showed good performance of such F1 tubers, grown from mini-tubers directly harvested from true-seed plants. According to a plot trial (90 plants), the estimated tuber yield of these F1 hybrids is on the order of 40 tons per hectare (60,000 plants), close to the yield of Lishu 6 (~45 tons per hectare), the major tetraploid variety grown in this re-gion, with 65% coverage of the local cultivated area. Here, it is important to note that these F1 hybrids also produced abundant fruits, which led to a reduction in resources available for tuber growth. Hence, further increases in the yield of these diploid hy-brids could be achieved either through adjustments in resource allocation to their tubers, or inhibition of fruit development.

&emsp; The yield potential of the diploid potato is considerable. The yield potential of 295 diploid germplasms was tested in the abovementioned Dehong ﬁeld trial in the winter of 2019. Among these tested lines, the average single plant yield (SPY) of 20 ac-cessions was higher than that for the tetraploid cultivar Lishu 6 (SPY = 1.05 kg) (Table S4), which was grown as a control. How-ever, knowledge regarding the genetic control over yield remains sparse. Although many yield QTLs have been reported (Bonier-bale et al., 1993; Bradshaw et al., 2008; Li et al., 2008; McCord et al., 2011; Scho¨ nhals et al., 2016, 2017), none has been cloned, due to the complexity of tetrasomic inheritance. With the devel-opment of the ﬁrst generation of inbred lines, we now have an opportunity to identify and clone such high yield genes at the diploid rather than at the tetraploid level. Genome-assisted backcrossing, a routine process employed in seed crops, now enters the toolbox of potato breeding. When they are identiﬁed, we could achieve the introgression of one or a few such yield genes within 2 years, including one cross, two backcrosses, and one selﬁng. In this manner, we anticipate overcoming the yield gap between the diploid hybrid potato and tetraploid culti-vars in 2–3 rounds of introgressions.

&emsp; Clearly, potato hybrid breeding is still in its infancy. Genome design will attract the next generation of potato breeders who will collectively transform potato breeding from a slow non-accu-mulative mode into a fast-iterative mode, making potato both a more productive crop and a more nutritious food. We even antic-ipate that hybrid breeding and genome design will transform po-tato into a non-host to its most devasting disease, the late blight, making it a more environmentally friendly crop.

## Limitations of the study

&emsp; Lower genome heterozygosity and less deleterious mutations are two standards of selecting starting materials but cannot guarantee the successful development of highly homozygous inbred lines. Although some advanced inbred lines developed by genome design don’t harbor large-effect deleterious mutations, they might accumulate too many minor-effect deleterious mutations, which lead to weak growth vigor and male sterility. Thus, the breeders should select multiple starting materials in practical breeding. In addition, the accuracy of predicted deleterious mutations needs to be further enhanced by improved algorithms in the future.

<hr style="border-top: 5px dashed black;">
<p align="center"><font size=5><b>分割线</b></font></p>
<hr style="border-bottom: 5px dashed black">